## Final Write-Up

#### Short Abstract

#### Introduction
Chronic rhinosinusitis has been rising in the US population since 1991, with 15% of the US population being affected by the disease in 2009. Endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) is the preferred treatment for chronic rhinosinusitis, following failure of conservative therapy approaches (4). Since chronic rhinosinusitis affects such a large percentage of the population, this study seeks to examine the effect of preoperative health conditions on postoperative ESS in adult patients. This analysis was done using data from the ACS NSQIP dataset during the years 2014-2016. This data contains over 150 demographic and health variables such as preoperative risk factors, intraoperative variables, and 30-day postoperative outcomes for inpatient and outpatient patients undergoing major surgical procedures (1). From 2014-2016, the data contained records of 565 patients identified as having undergone endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS), approximately 0.02% of the entire dataset (2). Other studies have demonstrated the usefulness of the NSQIP dataset in examining the relationship between a specific health condition and ESS outcomes. A study used NSQIP data from 2005-2013 to analyze ESS outcomes for patients with diabetes mellitus (DM), finding that patients with DM are at a greater risk for for postoperative medical complications following ESS (3). Rather than focus on a specific comorbidity, this study took a broad approach by looking at multiple comorbidities that were included as variables in the dataset and analyzing postoperative outcomes.

#### Experimental Set-Up 
Patient data collected through the ACS NSQIP database from the years 2014-2016 were used for this analysis. From 2014-2016, 565 patients were identified as having undergone endoscopic sinus surgery. Patients were identified as having undergone endoscopic sinus surgey if their patient record contained any of the ESS CPT codes:  
31237: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical; with biopsy, polypectomy or debridement  
31239: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical; with dacryocystorhinostomy  
31240: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical; with concha bullosa resection  
31254: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical; with ethmoidectomy, partial (anterior)  
31255: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical; with ethmoidectomy, total (antreior and posterior)  
31256: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical, with maxillary antrostomy  
31267: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical, with maxillary antrostomy; with removal of tissue from maxillary sinus  
31276: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical with frontal sinus exploration, with or without removal of tissue from frontal sinus  
31287: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical, with spenoidotomy  
31288: Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical, with sphenoidotomy; with removal of tissue from the sphenoid sinus  

Patients that did not contain one of the above CPT codes in their data were filtered out from the study. Further analysis was only performed on this sample of 565 patients.   

Statistical analysis was performed using python scripts written for this study. Pandas, an open source python library for data analysis, was used to process the CSV files from the NSQIP database into data structures for statistical analysis (6). Multivariate logistic regression was performed using the statsmodels python library, an open source module for conducting statistical tests, building statistical models, and statistical data exploration (5). All python scripts and modules used for this study can be found in this Github repository: https://github.com/catiegrasse/independent-study  

Significance between proportions of patients with comorbidities was determined using a two-sample z test for independence. Odds ratios were calculated using the statsmodels python library, which generates the coefficients and 95% confidence interval for each variable in the logistic regression. The odds ratio for a specific variable was calculated by taking the exponential of that variable's coefficient as generated by the statsmodels logistic regression. The confidence interval for a specific variable was calculated by taking the exponential of that variable's confidence interval as generated by the statsmodels logistic regression. 

#### Experimental Results

#### Conclusion
Since this analysis used data only from the years 2014-2016 in the NSQIP database, there were certain outcomes and comorbidities with 10 or less patients in the inpatient or outpatient setting (for example: postoperative ventilator use, actue renal failure, and ascites) which did not allow for robust analysis. Further research could be done using a larger sample of the NSQIP dataset to both validate the results shown in this paper as well as analyze less common comorbidities and postoperative complications.

#### Sources
(1) NSQIP User Guide  
(2) NSQIP Data  
(3) Filimonov A, Chung SY, Wong A, Brady JS, Baredes S, Eloy JA. Effect of diabetes mellitus on postoperative endo- scopic sinus surgery outcomes. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2017;7:584–590   
(4) https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.lib.duke.edu/doi/full/10.1097/00005537-200202000-00020  
(5) https://www.statsmodels.org/stable/index.html  
(6) https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/index.html  


